PEP 705: Rewrite to focus on TypedDict changes (#3440)
python/peps: peps/pep-0705.rst

    class EntertainmentMovie(TypedDict, readonly=True, other_keys=False):
        movie: Movie

    class EntertainmentBook(TypedDict, readonly=True, other_keys=False):
        book: Book

    Entertainment = EntertainmentMovie | EntertainmentBook

    def get_name(entertainment: Entertainment) -> str:
        if "movie" in entertainment:
            return entertainment["movie"]["name"]
        elif "book" in entertainment:
            return entertainment["book"]["name"]
        else:
            raise ValueError("Unexpected entertainment type")

Specification
=============

``TypedDict`` will gain two new boolean flags: ``other_keys`` and ``readonly``. A new ``typing.ReadOnly`` type qualifier is added.

``other_keys`` flag
-------------------

The ``other_keys`` flag to ``TypedDict``, when ``False``, indicates that instances may only contain keys explicitly listed in the type::

    class Album(TypedDict, other_keys=False):
        name: str
        year: int

    class AlbumExtra(Album, TypedDict):
        band: str  # Runtime error

This flag defaults to ``True``.

Type-checkers may rely on this restriction::

>     def album_keys(album: Album) -> Collection[Literal['name'] | Literal['year']]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    def album_keys(album: Album) -> Collection[Literal['name', 'year']]:
```

        # Type checkers may permit this, but should error if Album did not specify `other_keys=False`
        return album.keys()

Type-checkers should prevent operations that would violate this restriction::

    class AlbumExtra(TypedDict, other_keys=False):
        name: str
        year: int
        band: str

    album: AlbumExtra = { "name": "Flood", year: 1990, band: "They Might Be Giants" }
    album_keys(album)  # Type check error: extra key 'band'

``readonly`` flag
-----------------

> The ``readonly`` flag to ``TypedDict``, when ``True``, indicates that no mutator methods (``__setitem__``, ``__delitem``, ``update``, etc.) will be generated::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``readonly`` flag to ``TypedDict``, when ``True``, indicates that no mutator methods (``__setitem__``, ``__delitem__``, ``update``, etc.) will be generated::
```

Apart from the typo, the "generated" wording feels slightly wrong because type checkers may not work internally by "generating" these methods. I'd suggest instead:

```suggestion
The ``readonly`` flag to ``TypedDict``, when ``True``, indicates that no mutator operations (``__setitem__``, ``__delitem__``, ``update``, etc.) will be permitted::
```

    class NamedDict(TypedDict, readonly=True):
        name: str

    def get_name(d: NamedDict) -> str:
        return d["name"]

    def set_name(d: NamedDict, name: str) -> None:
        d["name"] = name  # Type check error: cannot modify a read-only entry

``typing.ReadOnly`` flag
------------------------

> The ``typing.ReadOnly`` type qualifier is used to indicate that a variable declared in a ``TypedDict`` definition will not be included in any generated mutator method overloads::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``typing.ReadOnly`` type qualifier is used to indicate that a variable declared in a ``TypedDict`` definition may not be mutated by any operation performed on instances of the ``TypedDict``::
```

    class Person(TypedDict, other_keys=False):
        name: str
        age: int

A TypedDict type ``A`` is consistent with TypedDict ``B`` if ``A`` is structurally compatible with ``B``. This is true if and only if all of the following are satisfied:

* For each key in ``B``, ``A`` has the corresponding key and the corresponding value type in ``A`` is consistent with the value type in ``B``, unless the key in ``B`` is of type ``ReadOnly[NonRequired[Any]]``, in which case it may be missing in ``A`` provided ``A`` allows other keys.
* For each non-read-only key in ``B``, the corresponding value type in ``B`` is also consistent with the corresponding value type in ``A``.
* For each required key in ``B``, the corresponding key is required in ``A``.
* For each non-read-only, non-required key in ``B``, the corresponding key is not required in ``A``.
* If ``B`` does not allow other keys, then ``A`` does not allow other keys.
* If ``B`` does not allow other keys, then for each key in ``A``, ``B`` has the corresponding key.

Discussion:

* All non-specified keys in a type that allows other keys are implicitly of type ``ReadOnly[NotRequired[Any]]``.

> * Read-only value types behave covariantly, as they cannot be mutated. This is similar to container types such as ``Mapping``, and different from non-read-only value types, which behave invariantly. Example::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Read-only value types behave covariantly, as they cannot be mutated. This is similar to container types such as ``Sequence``, and different from non-read-only value types, which behave invariantly. Example::
```

``Mapping`` isn't a great example because it's invariant in the key type

Rationale
=========

The first two motivating examples can be solved by removing the ability to update one or more of the entries in a ``TypedDict``. This does not mean the entries are immutable; a reference to the underlying dictionary could still exist with a different but compatible type in which those entries have mutator operations. As such, these are not "final" entries; using this term would risk confusion with final attributes, which are fully immutable. These entries are "readonly".

To support this, we propose adding a new boolean flag to ``TypedDict``, ``readonly``, which when set to True, removes all mutator operations from the type::

    from typing import NotRequired, TypedDict

    class Movie(TypedDict, readonly=True):
        name: str
        director: str

    class Book(TypedDict, readonly=True):
        name: str
        author: str

> In addition to these benefits, by flagging arguments of a function as read-only, it makes explicit not just to typecheckers but also to users that the function is not going to modify its inputs, which is usually a desireable property of a function interface.

Reviewer 2: I first understood that this line suggests that every function that doesn't assign to its arguments should now be written like this:
```py
def foo(arg1: ReadOnly[int], arg2: ReadOnly[list[str | None]], arg3: ReadOnly[SomethingElse]) -> None: ...
```
I hope this is not the case, and it would be good to clarify that specifically using read-only TypedDict types for arguments can be useful. 

Also I'm not sure if it's explicitly spelled out that `ReadOnly` is only valid when specifying TypedDict item types, and not for attributes of normal classes or variables. It should be rejeted in type aliases as well, I think -- it's not a type modifier, but a modifier for a TypedDict item.

Author: I don't want to seem like using it elsewhere is ruled out in future, though. For instance, Jelle suggested it would be useful in Protocols. I can imagine it being useful on base class attributes too, as an alternative to adding a `@property` decorator. How would you suggest wording this?

Reviewer 2: The wording looks better, thanks!

I agree that `ReadOnly` could be useful in protocols and perhaps ABCs. Maybe say something like this: "this PEP only proposes making ReadOnly valid in a TypedDict, but a possible future extension would be to support it in additional contexts, such as in protocols".

Author: Done, thanks :)

    class AlbumCollection(TypedDict, readonly=True):
        albums: Collection[Album]

    class RecordShop(AlbumCollection, TypedDict):
        name: str
        albums: list[Album]

Subclasses can also require keys that are read-only but not required in the superclass::

    class OptionalName(TypedDict, readonly=True):
        name: NotRequired[str]

    class Person(OptionalName, TypedDict):
        name: Required[str]

    person: Person = {}  # Type check error: "name" required

Note that these are just consequences of structural typing, but they are highlighted here as the behavior now differs from the rules specified in :pep:`589`.

Finally, subclasses can have ``other_keys=False`` even if the superclass does not::

    class Person(OptionalName, other_keys=False):
        name: Required[str]

Type consistency
----------------

A TypedDict type with ``other_keys=False`` is consistent with ``Mapping[str, V]``, where ``V`` is the union of all its value types. For instance, the following type is consistent with ``Mapping[str, int | str]``::

    class Person(TypedDict, other_keys=False):
        name: str
        age: int

> A TypedDict type ``A`` is consistent with TypedDict ``B`` if ``A`` is structurally compatible with ``B``. This is true if and only if all of the following are satisfied:

Author: It should match PEP 589 for any TypedDict not using the new functionality. I could make that explicit?

> A TypedDict type ``A`` is consistent with TypedDict ``B`` if ``A`` is structurally compatible with ``B``. This is true if and only if all of the following are satisfied:

Reviewer 3: Yeah, that sounds great!

        author: str

    class EntertainmentMovie(TypedDict):
        movie: Movie

    class EntertainmentBook(TypedDict):
        book: Book

    Entertainment = EntertainmentMovie | EntertainmentBook

Users of this pattern expect type-checkers to allow the following pattern::

    def get_name(entertainment: Entertainment) -> str:
        if "movie" in entertainment:
            return entertainment["movie"]["name"]
        elif "book" in entertainment:
            return entertainment["book"]["name"]
        else:
            # Theoretically unreachable but common defensive coding
            raise ValueError("Unexpected entertainment type")

However, type-checkers will actually raise an error on this code; mypy, for instance, will complain that ``TypedDict "EntertainmentBook" has no key "movie"`` on the third line. This is because ``TypedDict`` does not prevent instances from having keys not specified in the type, and so the check ``"movie" in entertainment`` can return True for an ``EntertainmentBook``.

Users can alternatively use a non-total ``TypedDict`` instead of a union::

    class Entertainment(TypedDict, total=False):
        movie: Movie
        book: Book

> This ensures the ``get_name`` example type-checks correctly, but it no longer encodes the constraint that exactly one key must be present, meaning other valid code raises spurious type-check failures. In practice, we tend to see code using types like this either casting to the correct type, with the associated risk of mistakes, or moving the ``in`` checks to dedicated ``TypeGuard`` functions, reducing readability.

Author: I think this is answered now?

Rationale
=========

The first two motivating examples can be solved by removing the ability to update one or more of the entries in a ``TypedDict``. This does not mean the entries are immutable; a reference to the underlying dictionary could still exist with a different but compatible type in which those entries have mutator operations. As such, these are not "final" entries; using this term would risk confusion with final attributes, which are fully immutable. These entries are "readonly".

To support this, we propose adding a new boolean flag to ``TypedDict``, ``readonly``, which when set to True, removes all mutator operations from the type::

    from typing import NotRequired, TypedDict

    class Movie(TypedDict, readonly=True):
        name: str
        director: str

    class Book(TypedDict, readonly=True):
        name: str
        author: str

> In addition to these benefits, by flagging arguments of a function as read-only (by using a read-only ``TypedDict`` like ``Movie`` or ``Book``), it makes explicit not just to typecheckers but also to users that the function is not going to modify its inputs, which is usually a desireable property of a function interface.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I meant the parameters in the function definition, not the arguments being unpacked and passed.

> In addition to these benefits, by flagging arguments of a function as read-only (by using a read-only ``TypedDict`` like ``Movie`` or ``Book``), it makes explicit not just to typecheckers but also to users that the function is not going to modify its inputs, which is usually a desireable property of a function interface.

Author: I'll add this to the PEP for clarity, thanks

        members: Collection[str]

Alternative functional syntax
-----------------------------

The :pep:`alternative functional syntax <589#alternative-syntax>` for TypedDict also supports these features::

   EntityBand = TypedDict('EntityBand', {'band': Band}, readonly=True, other_keys=False)
   BandAndAlbum = TypedDict(`BandAndAlbum', {'band': str, 'album': ReadOnly[Album]})

Interaction with other special types
------------------------------------

``ReadOnly[]`` can be used with ``Required[]``, ``NotRequired[]`` and ``Annotated[]``, in any nesting order:

::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        title: ReadOnly[Required[str]]  # OK
        year: ReadOnly[NotRequired[Annotated[int, ValueRange(-9999, 9999)]]]  # OK

::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        title: Required[ReadOnly[str]]  # OK
        year: Annotated[NotRequired[ReadOnly[int]], ValueRange(-9999, 9999)]  # OK

This is consistent with the behavior introduced in :pep:`655`.

Inheritance
-----------

To avoid potential confusion, it is an error to have a read-only type extend a non-read-only type::

    class BandAlbumAndLabel(BandAndAlbum, readonly=True):  # Runtime error
        label: str

> It is also an error to have a type without ``other_keys`` specified, or with it specified as ``True``, extend a type with ``other_keys=False``::

Reviewer: This sentence is hard to parse for me. How about this?

```suggestion
Any subclass of a class with ``other_keys=False`` must also set ``other_keys=False``. It is an error to set ``other_keys=True`` or leave it unspecified::
```

>     class Person(NamedDict):  # Runtime error

Reviewer: It's been a while since the NamedDict class was introduced. Maybe better to keep the examples self-contained within a section so they are easier to understand without having to refer back to a previous section.

        name: str
        albums: list[Album]

Subclasses can also require keys that are read-only but not required in the superclass::

    class OptionalName(TypedDict, readonly=True):
        name: NotRequired[str]

    class Person(OptionalName, TypedDict):
        name: Required[str]

    person: Person = {}  # Type check error: "name" required

Note that these are just consequences of structural typing, but they are highlighted here as the behavior now differs from the rules specified in :pep:`589`.

Finally, subclasses can have ``other_keys=False`` even if the superclass does not::

    class Person(OptionalName, other_keys=False):
        name: Required[str]

Type consistency
----------------

A TypedDict type with ``other_keys=False`` is consistent with ``Mapping[str, V]``, where ``V`` is the union of all its value types. For instance, the following type is consistent with ``Mapping[str, int | str]``::

    class Person(TypedDict, other_keys=False):
        name: str
        age: int

A TypedDict type ``A`` is consistent with TypedDict ``B`` if ``A`` is structurally compatible with ``B``. This is true if and only if all of the following are satisfied:

> * For each key in ``B``, ``A`` has the corresponding key and the corresponding value type in ``A`` is consistent with the value type in ``B``, unless the key in ``B`` is of type ``ReadOnly[NonRequired[Any]]``, in which case it may be missing in ``A`` provided ``A`` allows other keys.

Reviewer 3: Should be `NotRequired` here.

    def f(a: A) -> None:
        print(a['x'] or 0)

    b: B = {'x': 1}
    f(b)  # Accepted by type checker

> * An TypedDict type ``A`` with no explicit key ``'x'`` that allows other keys is not consistent with a TypedDict type with a non-required key ``'x'``, since at runtime the key ``'x'`` could be present and have an incompatible type (which may not be visible through ``A`` due to structural subtyping). The only exception to this rule is if ``'x'`` is non-required, read-only and of type ``Any``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A TypedDict type ``A`` with no explicit key ``'x'`` that allows other keys is not consistent with a TypedDict type with a non-required key ``'x'``, since at runtime the key ``'x'`` could be present and have an incompatible type (which may not be visible through ``A`` due to structural subtyping). The only exception to this rule is if ``'x'`` is non-required, read-only and of type ``Any``.
```

Reviewer: Separately, what if x is of type `x: NotRequired[ReadOnly[object]]`? Seems like then it would also be safe.

Author: I updated this by the way. Hadn't realised `object` was also a top type.

Both mypy and pyright currectly permit this usage, however, as the only viable alternative has been to prevent calling ``update`` at all.

With the addition of ``other_keys``, it becomes possible to more accurately type the update method:

* Declare a new read-only TypedDict type that does not allow other keys
* Copy all non-read-only entries to it
* Make all entries read-only and non-required
* Union this with an iterable of matching key-value pairs

For instance::

    class Example(TypedDict):
        a: int
        b: NonRequired[str]
        c: ReadOnly[int]

    class ExampleUpdateDict(TypedDict, total=False, readonly=True, other_keys=False):
        a: int
        b: str
        # c is not present as it is read-only in Example

    ExampleUpdateEntry = tuple[Literal["a"], int] | tuple[Literal["b"], str]
    ExampleUpdate = ExampleUpdateDict | Iterable[ExampleUpdateEntry]

Type checkers should permit any type compatible with this TypedDict to be passed into the update operation. As with :pep:`589`, they may choose to continue permitting TypedDict types that allow other keys as well, to avoid generating false positives.

Backwards compatibility
=======================

> This PEP changes the rules for how TypedDict behaves, so code that inspects TypedDict types will have to change to support types using the new features. This is expected to mainly affect type-checkers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PEP adds new features to ``TypedDict``, so code that inspects ``TypedDict`` types will have to change to support types using the new features. This is expected to mainly affect type-checkers.
```

The existing wording feels too strong; it suggests that existing TypedDict code might change in behavior, when really it's only code that uses the new flags that can change.

There are no known security consequences arising from this PEP.

How to Teach This
=================

Suggestion for changes to the :mod:`typing` module, in line with current practice:

* Add this PEP to the others listed.
* Add ``typing.ReadOnly``, linked to TypedDict and this PEP.
* Add the following text to the TypedDict entry:

By default, keys not specified in a TypedDict may still be present. Instances can be restricted to only the named keys with the ``other_keys`` flag. *insert example, perhaps using ``in`` to illustrate the benefit*

Individual keys can be excluded from mutate operations using ReadOnly, allowing them to be read but not changed. This is useful when the exact type of the value is not known yet, and so modifying it would break structural subtypes. *insert example*

If all keys on a TypedDict should be read-only, the ``readonly`` flag can be used as a shorthand. *insert example*

Reference Implementation
========================

No complete reference implementation exists yet. pyright 1.1.310 ships with a partial implementation of the ReadOnly qualifier.

Rejected Alternatives
=====================

A TypedMapping protocol type
----------------------------

> :pep:`705` proposed a ``TypedMapping`` protocol type, behaving much like a read-only TypedDict but without the constraint that the runtime type be a ``dict``. The behavior described in this PEP could then be obtained by inheriting a TypedDict from a TypedMapping. This has been set aside for now as more complex, without a strong use-case motivating the additional complexity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An earlier version of :pep:`705` proposed a ``TypedMapping`` protocol type, behaving much like a read-only TypedDict but without the constraint that the runtime type be a ``dict``. The behavior described in the current version of this PEP could then be obtained by inheriting a TypedDict from a TypedMapping. This has been set aside for now as more complex, without a strong use-case motivating the additional complexity.
```

This is PEP 705; the reference will be confusing to future readers

Author: Hahaha thanks, good catch! I started out by creating a new PEP but was advised to merge back into this one. Missed this bit of text!

A higher-order Readonly type
----------------------------

> A generalized higher-order type could be added that removes mutator methods from its parameter, e.g. ``ReadOnly[MovieRecord]``. For a TypedDict, this would be like adding ``readonly=True`` to the declaration. This would naturally want to be defined for a wider set of types than just TypedDict subclasses, and also raises questions about whether and how it applies to nested types. We decided to keep the scope of this PEP narrower.

Reviewer: I think ReadOnly would also make a lot of sense on Protocol members, but that's something that would have to be added in a separate PEP. Agree that this PEP should remain limited to TypedDict enhancements.

> Preventing other keys with the typing.final decorator

Reviewer: When I saw the `other_keys` part of the PEP I thought of the proposal in https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-692-using-typeddict-for-more-precise-kwargs-typing/17314/87?u=jelle, which has come up a few times. It's a way to specify that the remaining keys in a TypedDict are of a particular type. I have two concerns:
- This PEP's `other_keys` flag could lead to user confusion if users expect it to work like the linked idea
- This PEP's use of the `other_keys` name could make it more difficult for a future PEP to implement the other idea, if that PEP also wants to use the name "other_keys".

Author: I think the other proposal could reuse this argument:

`other_keys=int`

They're both constraining the "other keys", and they're mutually incompatible, so I think this would be ok?

Reviewer: #3441 was just created, proposing an `__extra__: T` field. I feel if both PEPs are accepted as currently written, we'd end up in a confusing situation, but I'll have to think more about how I'd recommend combining the two.

Author: I'm happy for this PEP to defer the exact way of specifying the extra field to PEP-728 (and associated discussion). My only concern is if it lands first!

* They could both use `other_keys`, and `False` could be a synonym for `Never`
* They could both use `other_keys`, and this PEP could add *only* `other_keys=Never` (i.e. it's no longer a boolean, but if only this PEP merges, no other type is allowed)

(Replace `other_keys` with `__extra__` or whatever comes out of the PEP-728 discussion.)

Author: Is this something I should note directly in the PEP draft?

Reviewer 3: `other_keys=Never` sounds like a reasonable approach.

Rejected Alternatives
=====================

A TypedMapping protocol type
----------------------------

An earlier version of :pep:`705` proposed a ``TypedMapping`` protocol type, behaving much like a read-only TypedDict but without the constraint that the runtime type be a ``dict``. The behavior described in the current version of this PEP could then be obtained by inheriting a TypedDict from a TypedMapping. This has been set aside for now as more complex, without a strong use-case motivating the additional complexity.

A higher-order Readonly type
----------------------------

A generalized higher-order type could be added that removes mutator methods from its parameter, e.g. ``ReadOnly[MovieRecord]``. For a TypedDict, this would be like adding ``readonly=True`` to the declaration. This would naturally want to be defined for a wider set of types than just TypedDict subclasses, and also raises questions about whether and how it applies to nested types. We decided to keep the scope of this PEP narrower.

Preventing other keys with the typing.final decorator
-----------------------------------------------------

> Instead of adding an ``other_keys`` flag to TypedDict, treat classes decorated with :func:`~typing.final` as disallowing other keys. This makes intuitive sense for TypedDict as it stands now: preventing adding any other keys guarantees no other types will be structurally compatible, so it is effectively final. There is also partial support for this idiom in mypy and pyright, which both use it as a way to achieve type discrimination. However, if any keys are read-only, preventing adding any other keys does **not** make the type final any more, so using the decorator this way seems incorrect. We recommend type checkers treat decorating a TypedDict type with final as identical to setting ``other_keys=False``, if they continue to support the idiom for backwards compatibility, but reject any use of final on a TypedDict with read-only keys. Once ``other_keys`` is adopted, they may also wish to deprecate use of final on TypedDicts entirely.

Reviewer 2: I'm not yet convinced that the potential presence of read-only keys makes reusing `@final` here wrong. `@final` is already used for more or less the same purpose, and I don't believe that the possibility of read-only keys would cause significant confusion. Documenting the behavior clearly seems sufficient to me.

It seems preferable to me to have a slightly different meaning for `@final` in the context of TypedDicts, instead of adding another subtly-similar mechanism, but with a completely different-looking syntax that is specific to TypedDicts. We are already reusing the class syntax for TypedDicts, which are clearly very different from normal classes, and users have been happy with it. Reusing `@final` seems likely to cause even less confusion.

    a.clear()  # Accepted by type checker

``update`` has been difficult to type correctly due to the open nature of TypedDict objects. Keys not specified on the type could still be present (and constrained) due to structural subtyping, meaning type safety could be accidentally violated. For instance::

    class B(TypedDict, total=False):
        x: int

    def update_b(b1: B, b2: B) -> None:
        b1.update(b2)

    class C(B, TypedDict, total=False):
        y: int

    class D(B, TypedDict, total=False):
        y: str

    c: C = { "x": 1, "y": 2 }
    d: D = { "x": 3, "y": "foo" }
    update_b(c, d)  # c is no longer a C at runtime

Both mypy and pyright currectly permit this usage, however, as the only viable alternative has been to prevent calling ``update`` at all.

With the addition of ``other_keys``, it becomes possible to more accurately type the update method:

* Declare a new read-only TypedDict type that does not allow other keys
* Copy all non-read-only entries to it
* Make all entries read-only and non-required
* Union this with an iterable of matching key-value pairs

For instance::

    class Example(TypedDict):
        a: int

>         b: NonRequired[str]

Reviewer 3: Should be `NotRequired` here
